rfc: structuring Tendermint as a library (#9086)
tendermint/tendermint: docs/rfc/rfc-022-structuring-as-a-library.md

# RFC 022: Structuring Tendermint as a Library

## Changelog

- 25 July 2022: Initial draft (@cmwaters)

## Abstract

> How do we want our users to use Tendermint? How does Tendemrint best deliver it's unique value proposition in a way that moves it towards being the leading generalizable consensus engine? This document aims to explore these themes mainly through comparison of Tendermint as a library or Tendermint as a service. The RFC focuses just on product direction and offers no concrete technical solutions although decisions here will dictate future technical discussions as we look to improve the ergonomics of the repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How do we want our users to use Tendermint? How does Tendermint best deliver it's unique value proposition in a way that moves it towards being the leading generalizable BFT consensus engine? This document aims to explore these themes mainly through comparison of Tendermint as a library or Tendermint as a service. The RFC focuses just on product direction and offers no concrete technical solutions although decisions here will dictate future technical discussions as we look to improve the ergonomics of the repository.
```

## Background

> The word "library" is not used once in the codebases' documentation, however, it is understood that this was perhaps the intention of the original authors. As the codebase expanded and adoption grew, there became a need to distinguish between private and public APIs to offer some stability whilst still developing the software. This acculminated in [ADR 060](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/docs/architecture/adr-060-go-api-stability.md) which internalized the majority of functionality behind an `internal` directory. This reflected the thinking at the time which endeavoured to present Tendermint as a simple service that one could run without having to worry about what was really happening. For those that had business concerns that required more than what was offered, they had to fork the codebase as is evident with [Celestia](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-core). While there has been numerous discussions over the past years, nothing has been explicitly documented as this RFC aims to do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The word "library" is not used once in the codebases' documentation, however, it is understood that this was perhaps the intention of the original authors. As the codebase expanded and adoption grew, there became a need to distinguish between private and public APIs to offer some stability whilst still developing the software. This culminated in [ADR 060](https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/blob/master/docs/architecture/adr-060-go-api-stability.md) which internalized the majority of functionality behind an `internal` directory. This reflected the thinking at the time which endeavoured to present Tendermint as a simple service that one could run without having to worry about what was really happening. For those that had business concerns that required more than what was offered, they had to fork the codebase as is evident with [Celestia](https://github.com/celestiaorg/celestia-core). While there have been numerous discussions over the past years, nothing has been explicitly documented as this RFC aims to do.
```
